---
title: "Case Study Inequalities in the Predictive Policing of LAPD"
date: 2023-06-06T15:00:05+02:00
draft: false
---

## Introduction

Operation LASER (Los Angeles’ Strategic Extraction and Restoration Program) aims to 'violent repeat offenders and gang members who commit crimes in the specific target areas with “laser-like precision', according to a peer-reviewed publication written by Uchida and Swatt(2013), by 'extracting offenders surgically, recovery time of the neighborhood is faster'. 

As one of the most famous application of predictive policing in Los Angeles Police Department(LAPD), Operation LASER, however, received intensified and persistent resistance from the community - the claimed beneficiar of it - and was eventually cancelled. There is clearly a tension between LAPD's predictive policing practices and its results, making this concept, once considered the 'future of law enforcement'(Pearsall, 2010; Norton, 2013), not the reputation its proponents had hoped for.

This paper discusses an important factor in this tension - inequalities - and its relationship to predictive policing practices. While the specific case focuses on LAPD, the discussion of the patterns of predictive policing practice also sheds light on related trends in other regions.

### What is predictive policing?

Just as many other concepts in the general social science field, predictive policing has several definitions that are slightly various among each other, and it is also used interchangeably with other terms such as big data policing or data-driven policing in some contexts.

Even before discussing its various applications, it should be noted that the concept of predictive policing itself is a social product, which means its definition could be used and maintained by interested parties. For example, Craig Uchida's conceptualization is used by several studies: 'Predictive policing is a concept that is built on the premise that it is possible to predict when and where crimes will occur again in the future by using sophisticated computer analysis of information about previously committed crimes.'(Uchida, cited in Norton, 2013; see also in Tayebi & Glässer, 2016) However, Uchida himself is the president of Justice & Security Strategies, Inc (JSS), which has provided several predictive policing technologies and services such as Operation LASER (Los Angeles’ Strategic Extraction and Restoration Program) to LAPD. Additionally, the other author of the publication mentioned at the beginning of this essay, Marc Swatt, also works for JSS. This should lead us to a critical view: discussions about predictive policing are inevitably influenced by stakeholders, who (including law enforcement, and the private service providers they work with) often have sufficient motivation and social capital to influence the discussion, and the framing effect itself should be included in the inequality of predictive policing.

In this study, a definition provided by Meijer and Wessels'(2019) overview study about predictive policing will be used:

>Predictive policing is the collection and analysis of data about previous crimes for identification and statistical prediction of individuals or geospatial areas with an increased probability of criminal activity to help developing policing intervention and prevention strategies and tactics.

According to Brayne(2020), there are four fundamental procedures of predictive policing: collection, analysis, intervention, and response. Though Brayne does not indicate it explicitly, subjects involved in these four stages are different: in the first two stages, the subject is data - being collected through various sources, and being interpreted to form conclusions; in the third stage, the subject is policing resources (patrol cars, equipment, officer's shifts etc.); and the fourth stage, the subject is the change in crime, or 'crime rate' as a metric. These four stages are in turn part of a larger cycle, as they themselves generate new data for future use.

Additionally, the outcome of predictive policing as a whole is not forecasted crime itself, instead, it is 'more about divining hidden crime-inducing environmental conditions which can be deterred by an intentional police response'(Ferguson, 2017) or a specific part of the population that 'are disproportionately responsible for most violent crime'(Brayne, 2020). This is important for evaluation because it may define 'successful policing' in the context of predictive policing, while other consequences might be caused yet excluded. For example, the police intervention of a 'hot area' may cause 'displacement', which means 'the individual moves on to other places to commit the crime'(Brayne, 2020), and in this case, it may still be counted as a successful police intervention.

### LAPD's usage of predictive policing

Though 'predict policing' may seem new, using data for policing is not a fresh idea for law enforcement in the United States, especially for the LAPD, which is particularly keen in developing technology for law enforcement(Brayne, 2020).

In her fieldwork on how LAPD uses predictive policing, Brayne (2020) points out that LAPD began its quantitative transformation as early as the early 20th century. The 'pin map' method introduced by August Vollmer is one example of this tradition.

In LAPD and its affiliates, two major frameworks could be used to understand the application of predictive policing. The first framework is base on how the law enforcement generate knowledge, and divides it into two forms: dragnet surveillance and directed surveillance(Brayne, 2020). Dragnet surveillance aims to incorporate as many data sources as possible and integrate them into the law enforcement, and then use these data and/or connections between these data to track crimes or 'forecast' crimes by setting automatic alert thresholds. Directed surveillance places more emphasis on depth and continuity of data collection than on breadth: it is based on the empirically validated premise that crime is not randomly dispersed (Brayne, 2020) and is conducted on a continuous basis for specific populations and locations. Thus, directed surveillance itself can be divided into person-based and place-based models(Brayne, 2020), which is the second framework: the former one is based on the assumption that 'a small group of the population are disproportionately responsible for most crimes' and therefore uses continuous surveillance of a specific population to reduce crime rates; the latter is based on 'canonical events-based, place-based, and opportunity theories of crime' and uses (patterned) events or locations as the unit of analysis to make predictions. 

A comprehensive example of LAPD in practice is the aforementioned Operation LASER. Provided by a third-party company - Uchida's JSS - it is a predictive policing program that is initiated in 2011 and shut down in 2019. Operation LASER deployed both dragnet surveillance and directed surveillance, as well as both person-based and place-based methods in the directed part.

The dragnet level of Operation LASER is its cooperative use of Palantir, which is an integrated platform which merges data from the department itself and other institutions that are 'typically not associated with crime control' (Brayne, 2020; Haskins, 2020). Despite police departments claiming that more data would help improve their efficiency and accountability, this has led to a significant lowering of the threshold for inclusion in police databases and has led to an increasing number of people who have no police contact being included in the 'secondary personal networks' that police create for potential offenders, ultimately leading to an unfairly massive surveillance(Brayne, 2020).

The directed part of Operation LASER is particularly well known for its Chronic Offender Program: each of the 21 geographical areas under the department's jurisdiction has a 'bulletins' of 12 'chronic offenders' through a point system, and they are surveilled more closely(Ferguson, 2017; Smith, 2019; Brayne, 2020). However, a document from LAPD shows that this point system uses self-looping data such as police contacts to continue increasing the 'suspicious' weight of individuals on the list, which makes it demonstrate a systemic problem of confirmation bias(LAPD, n.d.; Brayne, 2020, Smith, 2019).

Though JSS, the founder of Operation LASER, provided a series of studies and reports claiming its positive effects, a review from the inspector general of Los Angeles Police Commission(2019) indicates that LAPD fails to use consistent standards to calculate and track the individuals. This report also states that e data anomalies with in the program make it impossible to draw conclusions to “meaningfully evaluate” its overall effectiveness to reduce crime(Smith, 2019). Moreover, drawbacks that led public criticism to Operation LASER also suggest other inequalities problems within its predictive policing strategies and practices.

## Problems

### What is the relationship between predictive policing and inequalities, and why?

Throughout this paper, the critical understanding of predictive policing is essential: predictive policing, from its conceptualization to its applications, is alway a social product. Scholars have indicated that though predictive policing is often marketed for its 'objectivity' and thus its potentials in improving police efficiency and accountability, it is still built within preexisting social context by creators with purposes, and used by human operators with their discretions (see Brayne, 2020; Richardson et. al., 2019; Ferguson, 2017). In other words, predictive policing is a social process within which preexisting social inequalities are included as an inherent core.

This is not to assert that predictive policing is destined only to maintain and reinforce social inequality; on the contrary, it still has the potential to reduce inequality, but it has not yet been realized. For example, the intensively collected data could also be used to 'police the police'(Ferguson, 2017; Brayne, 2020), which means to hold the police more accountable by tracking police activities. After excluding positive assessments from law enforcement itself or its partners (such as JSS), the debate on the effectiveness of predictive policing is not yet one-sided: an overview study shows that there is as yet not enough empirical evidence to assert its positive and negative effects (Meijer & Wessels, 2019). However, other evidences such as Brayne's(2020) first-hand fieldwork, reviews from the police department itself(Smith, 2019) and the fact that multiple applications have been resisted and cancelled not only in LAPD but also in other areas suggest that the status quo is still far from it's bias-free promise.

### How are inequalities reinforced through predictive policing?

Due to the inherently social nature of predictive policing, its impact on inequality emerges holistically, rather than being concentrated in one segment or type of practice. Based on the four fundamental procedures of predictive policing mentioned above, LAPD encounters several problems in this regard as follows.

#### Data collection and analysis: Over-collected but biased data, and the confirmation feedback loop

Because data is considered to be the 'raw material' of predictive policing, it is often placed at the heart of the legitimacy of the concept. However, data does not naturally have objective properties and is even, on the contrary, a social product, or, in the political economic view, a form of capital - the basic of power(Zuboff, 2015). As a result, data is inherently inequal: some groups in the population have more of it (including ownership, access, or knowledge etc.) while others have less(Brayne, 2020).

Consequently, there are several aspects of inequalities in the data collection and analysis stage. 

In the one hand, the proliferation of data collection methods not only increases massive surveillance, but also it is unevenly distributed and aimed: specific population and locations are under more data-intensive surveillance. For example, one of the dragnet practices deployed by LAPD is the ALPR(Automatic License Plate Reader), and though it collects everyone who passes through that area, the deployment itself is based on LAPD's crime statistics(Brayne, 2020). Another example is the police resistance of AVL(automatic vehicle locator), which is designed to report the real-time location of LAPD vehicles: it is usually turned off by police officers(Brayne, 2020), but the subject they surveil is unlikely to do so to surveillance tools over their heads.

In the other hand, the data that the law enforcement collected to train their algorithms is also biased. An obvious pattern is its tendency of creating 'confirmation feedback loop'(Richardson et. al, 2019, Brayne, 2020): while the initial data collecting efforts are emphasized on specific groups or locations based on preexisting inequalities, these parts of the society are under more intensive surveillance and consequently create more crime-related data. In other words, the law enforcement shapes its data by its own collection procedure, and the directed surveillance is thus biased. An example of this is the self-looping ranking system of Operation LASER, where individuals on the list will be frequently contacted by the police, and their contacts will in turn increase the likelihood of being contacted again.

#### Intervention and response: The uncontrolled secondary network and the incriminating of the 'digital double'

With the aim of improving efficiency, the police have their own organizational incentive to 'get people in the system'(Brayne, 2020). The marginal cost of bringing more people and information sources into the system is low, but the temptation is to find more 'hidden clues', even if the usefulness of the data is not clear at the time it is absorbed - this "collect first, find use later" strategy of data capitalization is now already a common practice in today's business models(Zuboff, 2015). Thus, under dragnet surveillance, individuals often do not need to be involved in any crime, but only need to have a data link to the central person of interest in order to be included in the 'secondary network'; and data sources that are not originally relevant to fighting crime, such as social institutions like hospitals or private data like retail data, are also are integrated for the same reason.

However, even aside from the obvious privacy concerns, this expansion of networks results in inequalities. The reason is similar to the data bias: racial minorities and people in poor neighbourhoods are more likely to be put into this secondary surveillance network, since they are already under biased surveillance. Moreover, they are also less unlikely to challenge the 'digital double'(Brayne, 2020) that the law enforcement built for them, because they have less access to and knowledge on what kinds of data is collected and how it is interpreted, while their more advantaged neighbours and police officers being able to resist it.

## Solutions

In her conclusion of predictive policing, Brayne (2020) argues that its social nature 'is both a problem and a saving grace', due to the fact that it is both problematic due to its own social presuppositions and can be corrected through the power of society. With reference to the suggestions made by her and Ferguson (2017, 2012), this paper also suggests three potential solutions.

### Redefine successful policing
In order to address inequality, many of the underlying concepts associated with predictive policing need to be revisited, due to the fact that it has been subject to stakeholder interference from its conceptualization. For example, crime rate is often the metric of most concern to the police, but is it really the most appropriate, or only, metric? There is also a lack of research into predictive validity, again because of the lack of a new definition of what constitutes 'successful policing': crimes that are predicted correctly and occur, while proving the system correct, mean that they are not prevented; if crimes are predicted but do not occur (such as the displacement), then the accuracy of the system is also difficult to assess (Feruson, 2017). In addition, non-punitive interventions need to be given attention as they relate to the fundamental purpose of policing(Brayne, 2020): to reduce criminal behaviour. Where wider surveillance and arrests may themselves lead to negative knock-on effects, other forms of intervention (such as education and financial assistance) should not be ignored because they do not appear to be directly related to crime control.

### Through effective auditing to 'police the police'
Though Smith's review(2019) could be seen as an effective example of the correcting effort to predictive policing within the police system, it is also important to note that it was released eight years after the launch of Operation LASER, under pressure from the community. The fact that data is a social capital that is distributed unevenly could in turn inspire solutions: the access, ownership and knowledge about what types of data is collected and how it is used should not remain in police departments' control(Feruson, 2017; Brayne, 2020). By using digital footprints created by police surveillance tools, social forces such as researchers, activists and journalists could form effective auditions towards the police, and thus change the asymmetrical status quo.

### Revisit the stakeholders in the public discussion
The final recommendation concerns the relationship between law enforcement and private enterprise. Whether for reasons of cost, convenience, or to avoid regulation, police are increasingly obtaining data and analytical services from third-party contractors, including commercial companies and researchers(Brayne, 2020). However, just as what the aforementioned publication from Uchida suggests, the public debate is inevitably influenced by these stakeholders, especially because they both have more social capitals and monopolize the data and cooperate secrecy. Though the second solution might improve the transparency of data and algorithms, a critical view of both the concept and the application of predictive policing is still necessary for public discussion.


## References
1. Meijer, A., & Wessels, M. (2019). Predictive Policing: Review of Benefits and Drawbacks. _International Journal of Public Administration_, _42_(12), 1031–1039. [https://doi.org/10.1080/01900692.2019.1575664](https://doi.org/10.1080/01900692.2019.1575664)
2. Norton, A. (2013). Predictive Policing- The Future of Law Enforcement in the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. _International Journal of Computer Applications_, _62_, 5.
3. Tayebi, M. A., & Glässer, U. (2016). Social network analysis in predictive policing. In _Social Network Analysis in Predictive Policing_ (pp. 7-14). Springer, Cham.
4. Uchida, C. D., & Swatt, M. L. (2013). Operation LASER and the Effectiveness of Hotspot Patrol: A Panel Analysis. _Police Quarterly_, _16_(3), 287–304. [https://doi.org/10.1177/1098611113497044](https://doi.org/10.1177/1098611113497044)
5. Matthies, C., & Chiu, T. (2014). Putting a value on crime analysts: Considerations for law enforcement Executives. *the Vera Institute of Justice*.
6. Pearsall, B. (2010). _Predictive policing: The future of law enforcement?: (596372010-007)_ [Data set]. American Psychological Association. [https://doi.org/10.1037/e596372010-007](https://doi.org/10.1037/e596372010-007)
7. Brayne, S. (2020). _Predict and surveil: Data, discretion, and the future of policing_. Oxford University Press, USA.
8. Ferguson, A. G. (2017). _Policing Predictive Policing_. _94_, 82.
9. Ferguson, A. G. (2012). Predictive Policing and Reasonable Suspicion. _EMORY LAW JOURNAL_, _62_, 68.
10. Smith, M. P., (2019), Review of selected Los Angeles Police Department data-driven policing strategies. http://www.lapdpolicecom.lacity.org/031219/BPC_19-0072.pdf
11. Haskins, C., (2020). Scars, Tattoos, And License Plates: This Is What Palantir And The LAPD Know About You. BuzzFeed. https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/carolinehaskins1/training-documents-palantir-lapd
12. LAPD, (n.d.) Operation LASER (slides), retrieved on April 15, 2022 from https://stoplapdspying.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/LASER.pdf
13. Richardson, R., Schultz, J. M., & Crawford, K. (2019). Dirty data, bad predictions: How civil rights violations impact police data, predictive policing systems, and justice. _NYUL Rev. Online_, _94_, 15.
14. Zuboff, S. (2015). Big other: Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of an Information Civilization. _Journal of Information Technology_, _30_(1), 75–89. [https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2015.5](https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2015.5)